This free e-book was downloaded from www.holybooks.com . it was translated by bart marshall . the
translations from sanskrit were valuable as reference but required patient study . the words
universe, world, creation and illusion are synonyms referring to the apparently real (but not)
manifest world of physical objects, people, personal self, ideas, thoughts, gods, knowledge,
concepts, myths, religions, history, memories, emotions, time, space . the author uses the
characters of ashtavakra and king janaka to set up a classic dialogue between guru and disciple . it
quickly becomes a guru-guru dialogue, but some translators have done away with the dialogue format
and attributed everything to the sage . janaka says the lord of the universe can do as he pleases .
in a terse four verses, he points to the next step—dissolution . he says he knows that already,
matching him in style and number . 1.2 to be free, shun the experiences of the senses like poison .
1.4 abide in awareness with no illusion of person. 1.5 you are invisible, unattached, formless. you
are the witness of all things . 1.12 you are self—the solitary witness. you are perfect, all-
pervading, one . give up the idea that you are separate, a person, that there is within and without
. 1.16 you are pure consciousness—the substance of the universe . 2.1 i am now spotless and at
peace-- awareness beyond consciousness . 2.2 by this light alone the body and the universe appear.
2.4 as waves, foam and bubbles are not different from water, so the universe emanating from self is
not different . 2.12 i am wonderful indeed-- beyond adoration. even with a body i am one. i am
everywhere at once. 2.13 i am astounded at my powers. the universe appears within me but i do not
touch it . 2.15 i am the transparent self in which through ignorance they appear . in the limitless
ocean of myself, waves of beings arise, collide, play for a time, then disappear--as is their nature
. 3.1 having realized yourself as one, being serene and indestructible, why do you run around in
turmoil? 3.5 strange that one abiding in the absolute should be vulnerable to lust and weakened by
amorous pastimes . 3.8 strange that one who is unattached to the things of this world and the next
should yet fear the dissolution of the body . 3.9 whether acclaimed or tormented the serene sage
abides in the self. he is neither gratified nor angered . 4.5 of the four kinds of beings, only the
sage can renounce aversion and desire . 5: four ways to dissolution ashtavakra said: 5.1 you are
immaculate, touched by nothing . know yourself as one. enter the peace of dissolution . in me, the
shoreless ocean, the ark of universe drifts here and there on the winds of its nature . i am neither
enhanced nor diminished. 7.4 the self is not in objects, nor are objects in the pure and infinite
self . 8.2 when the mind does not desire or grieve, accept or reject, become pleased or displeased,
this is bondage . 9.2 rare and blessed is one whose desire to live, to enjoy and to know has been
extinguished by observing the ways of men . 9.3 seeing all things as threefold suffering, the sage
becomes still . 9.5 the greatest seers, saints and yogis agree on very little . there is desire,
there is the world. be firm in non-attachment. be happy. 10.4 bondage and desire are the same. only
by detaching from the world does one joyfully realize self . 10.5 you are one— awareness itself.
even ignorance is unreal . one who realizes this for certain has no memory of things done or left
undone . 11.7 "from brahma to the last blade of grass-- i alone exist" 11.8 "from the end of grass"
becomes immaculate, serene, unconflicted . 13.1 the tranquil state of knowing self alone is rare,
even among those who own but a loincloth . i therefore neither renounce nor accept and am happy .
13.2 the body is strained by practices. the tongue tires of scripture . 15: knowledge of the self
ashtavakra said: 15.1 a man of open intuition may realize the self upon hearing a casual instruction
. a man of cluttered intellect inquires bewildered for a lifetime . 15.2 attraction to the world’s
offerings is the suffering of bondage . if the body lasts until the end of time or perishes today,
is there gain or loss for you? 15.11 let the waves of the universe rise and fall as they will. you
have nothing to gain or lose. you are the ocean. 15.13 in you who are one— immaculate, still
awareness— from where can birth, action or a separate person arise? 15.14 consider everything self.
be desireless. be happy. 15.16 your ignorance alone creates the universe . 16.2 you can recite and
discuss scripture all you want, but until you drop everything you will never know truth . 16:
special instruction ashtavakra said: 16.1 you can enjoy and work and meditate, but you will still
yearn for that which is beyond all experience . 16.5 the master idler, to whom even blinking is a
bother, is happy . the true knower ashtavakra said: 17.1 one has attained knowledge and reaped the
fruits of yoga who is content, purified of attachments and at home in solitude . 17.5 those who
desire pleasure and those who desire liberation are common in the world. sage sees no difference
between happiness and misery, man and woman, adversity and success . the liberated one neither
avoids experience nor craves it . he enjoys what comes and what does not . the sage is free. his
empty mind no longer projects delusion, dreaming, dullness. this state is indescribable . 18.1
praise that, which is by nature stillness and light, reveals the world as a dream . the yogi who
finds stillness is neither distracted nor focused . he knows neither pleasure nor pain, he is free
of knowing . 18.12 religious merit, sensory pleasure, worldly prosperity, discrimination between
this and that have no significance . the wise one is not troubled by action or inactivity . he lives
happily, doing whatever gets done . 18.21 for one who transcended the world there is no joy or
sorrow . the sage knows he is not a person, and therefore does nothing, even when the body is at
rest . 18.31 the liberated one does not exert effort to meditate or act . the ignorant man finds no
peace either by effort or non-effort . the wise do not see separate things-- only the timeless self
. 18.41 the fool tries to control the mind with the mind . the wise one delights in self alone.
there is no mind to master . the sage does whatever appears to be done without thinking of good or
bad . the yogi is undismayed, though pained he does not suffer . he has no need of practice or
liberation . the wise one knows himself to be formless, timeless, all-pervasive, immaculate, and
thus transcends duty and world . 18.58 even doing nothing the dull one is anxious and distracted .
1860 because he knows self, even action bears the fruit of stillness . the great soul who has
realized truth is free of desire, enjoyment and liberation . in all of space and time he is attached
to nothing . 18.70 peace is natural for one who knows for certain nothing exists . the sage lives
without thoughts of "i" or "mine" the sage is fearless, unassailable, no darkness, no light, nothing
to lose . 18.80 no heaven, no hell, no liberation for the living . his mind is cool and brimming
with sweetness . the man of knowledge seems to think, but has no thoughts . he seems to have
intelligence, but is empty-minded . the wise man is neither happy nor miserable, neither detached
nor attached . the liberated one, who abides unconditionally in self, is desireless . he does not
worry about what he did or did not do . 18.99 the wise one is neither pleased by praise, nor annoyed
by blame . there is no need to talk about the three ends of life . to talk of yoga is purposeless.
even talking about truth is irrelevant . 20.1 where is knowledge and ignorance? where is “mine”?
where are the origin or end of thought? where does the soul in bondage? where is the liberated soul?
my nature is unity . 20.9 where is distraction, concentration, knowledge or delusion? where is joy
or sorrow? i am stillness. 20.10 where is happiness or misery? 20.12 where is activity or
inactivity? where is liberation or bondage?